And it's not running, sir.
Good.
I understand you're all running this morning.
Yeah, I try to run every morning if I can.
What would you say your distance was this morning?
I would guess about three and a half miles.
We ran 30 minutes.
It wasn't amusing, the passage in your book about running in Jerusalem when the soldiers joined in.
And they knocked over the newspapers.
And their answer was, well, you don't know what could be behind the newspapers.
And that kind of, in microcosm, is basically what you're talking about, I think.
Well, it is.
I think this story is quite illustrative, because I think the Israeli soldiers genuinely felt that they might have machine guns behind those newspapers.
And the Palestinians, you know, felt a deep resentment that they were just being pushed around as innocent victims.
of the Israeli military occupation.
And it showed the incompatibility, the lack of communication, the lack of mutual respect between the two.
And it also showed, I might add, a former president's inability to bridge the gap between the two.
This book focuses on what you've learned since leaving office, basically in 1983, during
I wonder if there's anything that you've learned now that might have helped you while you were president dealing with the Mideast.
What insights do you think that you've gained now that might have been useful five years or so ago?
Well, obviously I had never had a chance as president to travel extensively in the West Bank and Gaza.
and to meet with Palestinians who were then living under their, I think, 17th year of military rule.
And I was really impressed with how they were adversely affected by not having basic civil rights, basic human rights.
Also, it was very difficult for me as president to meet
with the various Israeli leaders.
I had either met with Prime Minister Rabin at the very beginning, representing the Labor Coalition, or later with Prime Minister Begin.
But when I was in Israel as a former president with more time to spend, I was able to sit down for many hours.
with the different groups in Israel who represent such a wide diversity.
And it didn't have to be a regimented type of discussion.
No.
I met with the Peace Now people, you know, with all the labor leaders who have quite different points of view among themselves, and with the government leaders at that time headed by Prime Minister Begin and with Shamir as foreign minister.
And then, in addition, I was able to meet with scholars
in the universities in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem who has devoted their lives to an analysis of Israel, its history, the history of the Jewish people, the relationship with the Lebanese, with the Shiite Muslims, and with the Druze, and so forth.
So I had a chance to learn a lot from a scholarly perspective.
As a literary editor, which is my job, I'm really taken by the metaphor, the metaphoric use of Abraham throughout
And I wonder how that came to you to cover this, to encapsulate this entire.
Well, every Sunday I teach a Bible class.
Right now we're studying the book of Job.
But we go through a five-year cycle back and forth between the New Testament and the Old Testament.
And so biblical history has been part of my life since I was four years old.
In addition to that,
Sadat always made a point of emphasizing the fact that the Israelis and the Arabs, the Jews and Arabs, were brothers and sisters with Abraham being the father.
And of course this is a basic tenet of Christianity too, that those of us who share faith in the one God are also children of Abraham, that Abraham was a patriarch
Not because he was Jewish, but because he had unshakable faith in God.
So when Paul makes the explanation to the new churches in Rome and other places, he makes it very clear that Christians are also children of Abraham.
So I was trying to look for some common symbolism that might tie together the three different races.
We tend to forget that among the Palestinians, about 10% are Christians.
And a lot of the folks with whom I met when I was in Jordan and Egypt and Syria and in the West Bank and Gaza were Christians, pastors and priests who had the same relationship with the Israelis that the Muslim Palestinians did.
This was kind of a revelation to me, something I never had thought about much.
You point out in the book, sir, that the proper role of the United States should be as mediator, not advocate.
Sure.
perceive the United States performing now?
Are we acting as mediator, or are we inadequate?
We're primarily a non-entity now in the peace process.
I would say more of an obstacle than an asset.
We made one abortive move, ill-advised move, into the Mideast disputes when we sent troops into Lebanon and then authorized them to
who have become involved in the military exchange in what was, in effect, a civil war.
And they were in a very vulnerable position, and there was a tragedy as an outcome.
And now we have practically no influence in the area north of Israel, in either Syria or Lebanon.
I think this experience has kind of burned President Reagan and his administration in such an unpleasant way.
kind of productive experience, and they were reluctant to get back into it.
I think that the high point of Reagan's administration was the one speech he made on September the 1st, 1982, which is quoted in the book.
But there was never any, you know, persistent policy.
There was a spasmodic attempt to get people to move, but none of the parties involved, the Jordanians or Palestinians, the Egyptians or the Israelis, ever felt that there was a solid
commitment of the United States to stay in this to the end, despite the political consequences, despite the setbacks, despite the criticisms.
There was just no persistence there.
Why do you think that the current administration has apparently abrogated the use of diplomacy?
I think it's partially a philosophical aversion by President Reagan to the primary use of diplomacy
and negotiation to resolve disputes, even when it involves regional conflict.
I think his basic inclination is to say, well, I lead the greatest and most powerful nation on earth.
We'll use our power or our prestige or our influence to force others to do our will.
And in the process, we'll bring peace to this troubled region.
He tried to do it in Lebanon, and he's now trying to do it in Nicaragua.
And I think you have to recall that the last couple of years of Reagan's first term, there were no negotiations ongoing anywhere on earth, so far as I know, in spite of a wide range of problems and troubles and even areas of conflict.
How do you react to these first tentative
moves with the Soviet Union now by this administration?
With hope, but without any real basis for expectation, I don't know how sincere the Reagan administration is in its determination to reach an agreement with the Soviet Union.
There are some prerequisites to sincere negotiations.
Now, one is that you've got to recognize that there's some degree of rationality in the positions of your adversary.
Secondly, you've got to acknowledge that the ones with whom you're dealing have some prospect for permanence and power.
Third, there has to be a recognition that your adversary is negotiating in good faith and shares a general goal of the negotiation itself.
Third, that once an agreement is reached, they're likely to carry out the terms of an agreement.
If you don't believe any of those things, you remove all the basis for genuine negotiations.
And judging by President Reagan's statements and attitudes during the first four years, he said that the Soviet system was so rotten internally that it would soon be on the ash heap of history, that the Soviets were dedicated to war, not peace, that they were children of the devil,
And we were almost uniquely worthy of the blessings and the love of God that the Soviets had never negotiated in good faith, and they were not inclined to keep an agreement on breach.
Well, you know, if that is a premise, then you're unlikely to be sincere in the negotiation.
But as I said, my first statement in answering your question was, I hope that this has now changed and that there is a determination on both sides to reach an agreement.
You had to focus, obviously, in this book, and you mentioned that you just couldn't discuss Iran and Iraq.
Maybe you could explain why that really doesn't figure into this book.
Well, I wanted to keep the book relatively brief so that the average citizen who knew very little about the Mideach could read it.
It's kind of a briefing book, both for the American people and I think I can say without a proper degree of
It's a briefing book.
It would be very valuable to any international leader.
The chronology, may I interrupt, is spectacular.
That took more time.
9,000 B.C.
It would have been quite easy to write a 1,000-page book.
But to hone it all down to a little over 200 pages was a very difficult task.
So I wanted a book that could be understood by the average citizen and also by the experts on the Middle East.
Do you think perhaps you might have overreached?
I know that the Times Review said you tried to accomplish three different conjectures in one book.
What's your feeling?
I don't like to ask people to react to reviews, but it's a valid question.
I haven't read the Times Review yet, but I don't deny that I had a lot of ambition.
I don't ever expect to write another book just about the Middle East.
I wanted to write a history.
to give a scholar a chance to say, well, what was the origin of the PLO?
When was Syria formed?
What is the heritage of Abraham?
You know, what is UN Resolution 242?
What did Reagan say in his speech in September?
What do the Camp David courts actually require?
Who are the political opponents within the nation of Israel?
You know, that's one thing.
Another one is to shape opinion to the point that there's a great complexity there.
But that the peace process is not a hopeless task.
And then I also want it to be kind of a book to inspire the reluctant leaders to move forward.
I guess so many of us wonder now, with Reagan in his final term in a national election upcoming in three years, what is the future of the Democratic Party?
Do you have any thoughts on?
I think very good, a good future.
But it's not going to be shaped.
by decisions made in the Washington headquarters of a Democratic Party, nor even by a fine chairman like Paul Kirk, or a group of elder statesmen getting together in a secluded place in Maryland's suburbs to decide this is what the Democratic Party's going to do to win.
I think in 86 you'll see that the Democrats are going to put a very good, strong team together, and I would predict
that we'll likely have a majority in both the House and Senate.
Really?
Yeah.
You think that's reachable in the Senate?
That's what I believe.
And you can mark my words when the 86 election comes.
I can't guarantee it, but that's my prediction.
Secondly, of course, it'll depend on how Reagan does this term.
The press has treated Reagan with absolutely kid gloves until the past few months.
Only now do you see
People saying, well, you know, has this man been telling the truth?
I don't think he has.
You know, you only have to read the major columnists now to say, you know, Reagan claimed that the Pope endorsed his military aid for the Contras and that all of the Latin American leaders were on his side in his intervention in Nicaragua.
Well, all of that was false.
But only...
Very recently have the news reporters been saying, you know, is this guy telling the truth?
That's just an example.
So I think what Reagan does in this next four years will be, and certainly in the next three years, will be a major factor in whether we win or lose.
Secondly, who's the Republican nominee going to be?
I think it's likely to be George Bush, who certainly doesn't have the charisma of a Reagan, and I don't think he has the charisma of an average Democrat.
And the most important thing is who do the Democrats put forward?
Who do you...
I don't have any personal preference.
No, I don't have any personal preference, but there are some very good ones—Mario Cuomo, Bill Bradley, Sam Nunn from Georgia would be a very fine one, in my opinion—a wide range of potential candidates.
But the point is, are these candidates going to run on their own with a great deal of personal sensitivity about what this nation is?
its fears and concerns and doubts and trepidations along with its hopes and dreams and aspirations and ideals.
Secondly, I think this candidate has got to be able to take a very conservative position on a strong defense, on a deregulated free enterprise system, on
A federal government that doesn't try to dominate state and local decision-making, that would cut down the federal deficit drastically, things of that kind that are looked upon as conservative in nature.
And on the other hand, quite progressive in the area of civil rights here, human rights abroad, environmental quality.
Matters are concerning resolving regional disputes with peace.
diplomacy negotiations instead of belligerence, dedicated to reducing nuclear arsenals, things of that kind.
You know, I think that combination can be effective.
Do you think that Senator Kennedy would make a—consider another attempt?
I don't have any—I think certainly he's considering it now, and his close advisers are considering it.
I don't know what his decision would be.
Could you foresee—
Do you think that you could support him if he were the candidate of the party?
Well, he wouldn't be my choice, no.
I think it would be very difficult for Senator Kennedy to measure up to what I think a successful candidate would have to be.
I think we would have a hard time convincing the American people that he was a champion of a strong defense.
What are his principal shortcomings in your estimation?
Well, I was trying to describe it to you.
One is, I think it would be hard for him to measure up to what I've just described as a champion.
I think it would be very difficult for Kennedy to put himself forward as a conservative fiscal manager.
If he wanted to reduce a deficit as one of the primary goals, I think it would be very difficult for him to convince people that he wanted to see maximum competition in the free enterprise system.
And so, you know, there are some things that I think are crucially important where Reagan has gained some advantage by his rhetoric.
that would be difficult for Kennedy to do.
Going back to Reagan's victory, was this a victory in your view of one charismatic figure or a party, the Republican Party?
Did the Democratic Party have a major collapse?
No, I think it was primarily Reagan.
I don't know of any Democrat who could have defeated him in 1984.
of extraordinary good luck.
You know, at that particular juncture in our history, things looked very good.
The economy looked like it was on a roll, primarily because of borrowed money, but people were in good shape.
And at that time, there was a lull in the altercations.
Reagan is a master at convincing the public that anything that's unpleasant or disappointing
It's no concern of his that he was not involved in it.
It's always somebody else's fault.
Does the buck stop in his desk?
No.
The buck slips away from his desk in a miraculous fashion.
It's always his predecessors in office or the Republican senators or the Democratic House leaders or his own cabinet officers.
It's never his fault.
Does he rely, in your estimation, too much on staffs and those around him?
Using the concentration camp issue as an example, perhaps?
That's a decision that apparently Reagan made.
I think the first proposal was put forward.
But I think that his public statements indicate that this was a decision that he made personally as an ill-advised attempt to heal the wounds left over from World War II.
I'm sure that he has very carefully crafted
Each statement that he's made subsequently, which I think have not been a staff person just handing him a, you know, a three-by-five card in his reading, and I think he has personally written these deep statements that he's made.
Really?
Truly?
Sure.
Since it became a matter of great importance, you know, it's inconceivable to me that he would let a staff person write his statements.
It may very well be that the staff person working with Kohl's people in Germany originally proposed is an itinerary.
I don't think there's any doubt about that.
I'm sure that Reagan approved it, basically.
I think he underestimated the furor that would arise.
But once the furor did arise, then I'm sure that Reagan himself has had detailed meetings with his staff.
How can we get out of this mess?
And he's the one that has decided what to say.
Do you think it's a major issue, or do you think too much is being made at this point?
It's hard for me to know.
Sometimes an issue that involves very little in the way of tangible facts can become of great importance.
Obviously Watergate is the most extreme example.
I'm not trying to equate this altercation with Watergate, but you can dig yourself deeper and deeper into
Then it becomes a major issue when it wouldn't have otherwise.
If he just said, you know, that was a mistake, you know, I'm not going to visit the SS graves, I think that would be improper.
I'm going to visit a site where the Holocaust victims suffered, because that's where my heart is.
I think the whole thing would have been over in a few hours.
A general question, sir.
What does a young, bright former president do for the rest of his life?
What do you see as your role, your function?
I have a very... Many productive years.
I have a full schedule.
One thing is that a former president can decide what he wants to do.
No one else can tell me.
I'm not obligated to the general public.
So I've carved out by myself the last four years a very stimulating, challenging, and maybe ambitious goal.
I'm in my third year.
I've almost finished now my third year of teaching at Emory University as a distinguished professor.
I teach in all the colleges and the university, and I've enjoyed that.
I've written a couple of books, and they've done quite well to express my analysis, not only of what I did as president, but in the future.
I've raised enough money now to build a presidential library and a permanent center where Rosen and I will spend the rest of our active life, working on matters concerning peace in the Middle East, U.S.-Soviet relations, arms control, environmental equality, human rights.
education, health care.
And we identify issues that we think are of paramount importance to our country and to the rest of the nations.
And we can spend a year or so if we want to just working on one subject.
And we have a chance to travel extensively.
One of the things that I have is experience in the governor's office in the White House.
And the second one is very valuable, is access
personal access to almost any leader on earth.
Not just political and military leaders, but leaders in the field of agriculture or science or education or health care or human rights.
It comes through here.
I mean, on your 83 trip, setting up these—even though Mr. Bacon was hardly forthcoming in his— Well, we spent a good bit of time with Bacon.
He was not friendly or forthcoming, but he—you know, I stayed as long as I wanted.
I asked him as many questions as I desired.
Do you have one single great frustration from your term of office?
Well, obviously there are a lot of things that I wish I could have done with a second term.
I could have aggressively pursued the Mideast peace process and gotten SALT II either implemented or observed in all of its details.
And I think that I could have cemented more firmly
around the world a commitment to basic human rights.
So there are some things that—and I could have gone into my second term had I been re-elected.
I think that's easier to point out that I would now be out of office even if I had been re-elected.
But in the second term, I would not have had the millstone of Iranian hostages around my neck.
So there are a lot of things that I could have done.
Do you think that Senator Kennedy shares much of the blame for your defeat?
Some of it.
But, you know, I think that that was a case where the liberal wing of the Democratic Party were displeased with my conservative approaches to similar things, you know.
I tried to balance the budget, and I tried to have a strong defense, as I said earlier.
I tried to lessen the federal government role as it relates to state and local governments.
And I tried to deregulate the private enterprise system.
I think those kinds of things, cumulatively, arise a genuine support, either for Kennedy or for John Anderson, who had been conservative but got a lot of liberal support.
On the 60 Minutes piece that was on a few minutes back, your wife made a very interesting comment that President Reagan is a person who makes us feel comfortable with our prejudices.
Is this an observation that you would share?
Mrs. Carter speaking for herself in that process.
She had a particular case.
She had never made that comment to me before, but I've heard about it since.
One thing I might point out to you is that the 60 Minutes people spent three hours and a half making videotape of all kinds of subjects.
And when they presented the program that Sunday night, I didn't see it until three or four weeks later, they only selected 15 minutes of the anti-Reagan
That's the way it works.
I'm not really complaining because I anticipated it.
I think the answer is yes.
You know, I think President Reagan has made the country feel that everything's okay.
You know, it's okay for rich to get richer, for poor to get poorer.
It's okay for blacks and other minorities to suffer because, you know, it's really discrimination against white folks when we give
black people jobs, you know, but the whites don't get them.
I think it might seem like it was all right to have a society that's borrowing money against the future to finance.
So that was one succinct way, I guess.
I think so.
I think it was a very prescient way to put it and a memorable way to put it.
I have to say, again, she never had discussed that with me.
That's just the way she feels.
One last thing, sir.
Would you be so kind as to... I'm happy to.
I know.
How would you like to meet?
Well, my name is Nick, or Nicholas, which I'm a former naval officer.
I like to add.
Thanks very, very much.
Thank you.
Have a joy.
And this will be in tomorrow morning's newspaper.
It is.
So we just .
.
Why don't you .
Where are they located?
I could make some calls to them.
I don't know.
They're in Worcester.
Oh, I mean, it's in Worcester.
Yeah, the new project would be in Worcester.
It would be in America's Georgia.
Okay.
America's Georgia.
Habitat for Humanity.
Is this similar to the project that you work on?
It's the same project.
Would you be expected to come up and do some more commentary?
Maybe someday.
But I think that it's likely that we'll go back again to New York this summer to get this project.
That was wonderful.
And it's finished.
But that was a habitat project, and I'm very delighted it'll be one now.
That's wonderful.
One quick reaction on your daughter's arrest in Washington.
Well, the news reports that she consulted with me ahead of time were not true.
She never talked to me about it ahead of time.
She did talk to her mother.
But I'm very proud of Amy.
You know, she's a very intelligent young woman who's surprisingly familiar with both national and international
She's been interested in apartheid since she was in the sixth grade.
And so I was very proud that she let her views be known.
Thank you.
I guess they're going to throw us out.